so I just did a 30-minute video talking
about First Nations Cree Ajab way
languages indigenous Canada and you can
see in that video how much I care about
the topic in the past I decided to
devote the rest of my life to it and
then I decided I had to find something
else to do with the rest of my life
because there was no way for me to move
forward with it in Canadian emia so in
our own chit chat
this brought up the question of how do
you find options for graduate school ma
PhD a lot of this would be true even of
a BA how do you find these career paths
what would you do with it after you got
the diploma and you were basically
asking what would I do today if I want
to get back into First Nations languages
and studies what have you I want to say
first before we're getting any technical
details I think it's really profoundly
problematic that today this is really
put entirely on the shoulders of the
student and I I have I have white
privilege like I have a huge advantage
over other students in doing this I can
put on a suit and tie and walk into any
university in the world and make an
appointment to talk to a professor and
be taken seriously my voice right now
the voice you're hearing think about how
much harder that is to do if you're a
Pakistani immigrants you speak with an
accent think about which others do if
you're born Cree or a chip way or you
know you have other disadvantages my
manner of speaking it's funny anyway in
the past I was involved Buddhist studies
people talked about me as if I was at
some disadvantage because I was too
abrasive or too too forthright that's
supposed to walk initials and I would
say vegetable no I have huge advantage
that I'd been all over the world I'd
visited universities all over the world
in Asia in Europe in North America and
I'm treated with a lot of respect partly
on the basis of my research partly on
the basis of my experience better but
partly it's just the swag like you know
what I mean that's it not everybody can
do that not everybody can walk in and
even if the secretary treats you like
crap say hey excuse me
you know I'm here to make an appointment
you know what I mean you whatever it is
you're used to being in a in an
institutional context and hustling not
every week either but I have decades of
experience of this
but I think in the past decades ago
professors understood was really part of
their job whether or not they formally
had the title of graduate advisor to
really advise their students about what
their options were for MAS for PhDs for
other things and for the professor to be
the conduit of information for the
professor to talk to the other
universities and say well look I've got
a kid here about a candidate who wants
to do this or that kind of research or
has this ad that kind of background
their interest and today it's really
left up to the student alone with Google
the student alone with email the student
alone with Wikipedia to look around and
find these things I found that even when
I went in and talked to graduate student
advisors or student about the different
people whose job it was to help and
again I have a huge advantage I really
have befriended a huge network
professors when I was at University of
Victoria the professors weren't just
providing me advice like any other
student they were really taking time and
thinking about it was still completely
useless I mean still came up with
absolutely zero viable options the only
recommendation I got from my professors
at University of Victoria was to join
the CIA does again and again they told
me to join the C I felt like you ever
feel like you're living in a bad sitcom
you know what I mean it's like you're
going around talking these people it's
like have you considered the CIA it's
like is it my hair is that like you know
so yeah I believe me I'm not insulted I
mean they're not telling me to go work
at McDonald's or something but you know
anyway weird I never got a single
positive result of that but yeah it now
falls in the students shoulders to go
around and look at these things
email response like these are the
requirements this is right you know
here's our informational session
schedule please show up at the next
informational session and you'll get all
you know you'll get all the information
you need I did that for nursing and did
that for you that's gene I did that for
speech pathology I did that for
counseling you know I did that for and
did you do face to face conversations
with your own professors at your
undergraduate university or no did you
go in and talk to them
okay no because because you weren't
specialized enough okay yeah the
University other ones who didn't have
any of those programs just like
specifically those programs okay for
that reason okay okay okay because they
didn't have expertise in the areas you
were you were interested okay so that's
interesting because I was gonna say I
mean a lot of students don't feel
comfortable sitting down I'm talking to
professor that way yeah and you know on
both sides you have to go you do have to
build up the comfortable size you have
to make the professor comfortable too
you can't just walk in as a complete
stranger and you know yeah at those
informational sessions they were like
well if you have any questions at the
end you can ask me yeah and so I would
say most of the time it was like you
need to talk to need to talk to the
university about the actual requirements
for getting into this program like but I
mean the advice I'm normally looking for
is is this program good and if so what
is it good at and what you know it's
more nuanced information I'm looking for
I'm looking for off-the-record
recommendations and warnings and that
kind of thing yeah but I can tell you in
Canada the professors don't see that as
their role they're not prepared to give
that advice and they're they're
generally you know really bad at it you
know so we're surviving with Cree and
First Nations but I mean like the kind
of mission you need and professors here
when China really have it I kind of feel
like I should have put this at the start
of the video but you know one of the
things that really struck me when I
dealt with professors in China in the
Chinese speaking world so it's including
Hong Kong and Taiwan about obviously
China the level of Guana see the level
of right okay silly to give an example
if I talked to one professor in Taiwan
and one professor in China so talk to a
professor of anthropology in Taiwan they
know of every other professor in the
discipline and what I say they know of
them they know who they are
they know what their area of expertise
is what kind of research they do what
kind of research they don't do they have
that kind of knowledge of them they may
not know them personally they can call
in a favor but they have met them and
they're there in contact so when I talk
to one professor in Taiwan it was as
effective as talking to like 30
professors in Canada you'd really be
getting use information and here in
China
I've less experience but seven
both professors in anthropology and
professors in Buddhism they would know
what the options are so if you were a
student in that situation you could talk
to one professor and they'd be able to
say you okay well this is the kind of
work you want to do these are your
strengths that we know so this is what
you need to know this is what you know
they'd have a and in candidates the
opposite extreme when you talk to one
professor in Canada you're talking to
one cul-de-sac one dead end and nothing
they have no access to those they don't
know anything else they don't even know
the other department other professors
and their own departments around the own
their own their own University and I
don't think I've mentioned this on
youtube before but one of my professors
at University of Victoria and I have
respect for him and he also has respect
for me
after I'd meet after he maybe read two
of my two papers that submitted them and
you know so he knew me he'd seen my
resume and he did he respected my work a
lot he respected my intelligence he
respected the papers had given him I
said to him well look you know I'm I'm
out here trying to find a master's
degree program so you know do you wanna
supervise maybe I could do it here you
know here at University Victoria I could
just progress on to doing a master's
program and this was his answer he sat
there and he said every single graduate
student have had I tracked their
progress after they finished this
diploma not a single one has gone on to
full-time employment you know of any
kind of it of any kind and that's you
know this is so this is the thing you've
got to ask the right questions when
you're out there seeking advice and
professors you've got to ask their
questions you've also got to be willing
to really hear their answer when they're
giving it to you like I took that with
all due gravity and a lot of people
especially if you're a younger person
maybe you're 21 years old or something
I see a lot of people be like oh no no
no no it'll be oh oh it's wonderful or
they'll just you know reiterate vague
platitudes about how wonderful the
university is or the value of education
how wonderful something is in general
it's like no this this dude is being as
honest with you as he can be right like
he's not telling you this is a bad
program my life is a lie it's going
close right but you know he's coming as
close as he can to really telling you
don't enroll here it's a bad idea and
you know
yeah so you know I took that seriously
now that same professor he probably
would be happy to supervise me but you
know there's probably a lot that's what
he can tell me there are probably other
things he can't tell me so again you've
already heard this example but you know
University of Minnesota when I was asked
her in there about First Nations oh I
have another good example too at a
Algoma University but you know these are
different universities that first Asian
programs one of the main things I was
trying to ascertain when I got touched
them eyes look do you guys really teach
this language really really like it's
it's very easy to put a language on the
well on the list of courses say you've
got in the program what's what really is
the situation and University of
Minnesota I talked to one of the older
members of faculty and after he'd talk
to me for a little bit he said look the
opportunity here university Minnesota
really was a few decades ago today we
don't do this thing anymore
that is gold that's exactly the kind of
information you're you're mining for you
know you have to know who to ask you
have to know the right questions asked
and then you have to be able to take the
answer when that gives you you know
don't say back
oh no University of Minnesota has a
great reputation in this area of studies
I'm sure a wonderful take my $40,000 no
you got to hear that even if it's if
it's subtle you got to know you got to
know when to shut up and and feel with
the full gravity that they may be
hinting at or telling you an understated
way because you if they if they tell you
the truth in an e-mail you can
screenshot the email and send to their
boss or something you know what I mean
like if they say to you this department
is a disaster which it may be
you know whatever or they say hey look
you know actually the guy who took over
that program is a religious yeah it's
great for a frickin Young University you
don't know right like you know what what
are the issues what's what's being
unspoken there or something right and
with alcohol my University it was it was
deep into email correspondence and I
remember they wrote back to eventually
and just said you had talked to several
different people several different
professors and they said look what
you're seeking in terms of being able to
just take courses and Cree is so sorry
in that case it's a jib way take courses
in ship way and learn the Ojibwe
language
Anderson Ave we want to be able to offer
that we hope to be able to offer that in
the next
years but right now we really can't you
know we really don't we're not
delivering that's it you know I'd say
say no more so yeah you get you get
different person different people I'm in
a really weird position in terms of the
two areas I might have options in or
that I might I might be tempted to still
go back at a PhD in AI I mean I know
what I'm missing I've spent so many
years asking those questions and going
to visit campuses and meeting with
professors and again asking for those
indirect endorsements you know maybe
someone at the University of British
Columbia can't be honest with you about
what's good and bad about their
department but somebody at an adjacent
University somebody next door you know
what I mean can can say well look you
know it's it's not so great or no they
don't really do you know what you want
to do or something whatever whatever the
problem is and sometimes you have to
make these judgments just on the basis
of absence of praise you know what I
mean where it's like well look this is a
political science department or this is
a this is a you know but a Studies
department or agency a department and
nobody's ever told me anything good
about it and that can be very
significant especially if you directly
ask a professor to endorse it or not if
you say is this good or not simply if
they don't say anything positive about
it you've got to want to take that
seriously cuz they're they're not in a
position to say to you well you know the
problem is you know old man McCloskey or
something you know he's nuts and he's
tearing the department apart they
probably can't tell you the inside
gossip although plenty of the time I get
the inside gossip too when you were
looking into a University of Victoria
for learning Chinese did you know about
the issues because you talked about it
recently that they condensed a whole
right year into one so with with Chinese
they took a year well okay so I guess
they doubled it twice
they took they took the amount of time
they cut it in half and cut it in half
again and then with Japanese they cut it
in half again so it was a doubling
process but the Japanese was even worse
than the Chinese it was it was
ridiculous what they did right so like
an impossible right and I put together a
formal presentation about that to the
Ombudsman I took that to the D
the Ombudsman and said look this is the
number of new words they're expected to
memorize in a week in Chinese in this
course because this used to be over
three months and now it's one week or
something you know the compression so
ridiculous so I answer your initiation
so how did I do it
ultimately the question about whether or
not you Vic was a good bet came down to
email with one professor and that was
the professor the senior professor
teaching the Chinese language courses
and she reassured me she said no we have
a good program and the so it works in
this the layout and so on and what she
told me I mean she really only knew
about the course she taught herself
however I talked to an official advisor
someone whose full-time job is just
being a new student advisor and
everything that person told me was a lie
was false yeah I don't know to what
extent that was intentional her
competence I mixed of the two or a
hundred percent in confidence but that
was where every single thing that person
told me was false
and then when I well and then when I got
there but those questions that woman
wasn't wasn't wasn't specifically for
the Asian Studies department but a lot
of it really impacted my life because it
was like okay so we know he's fine
because it was like I already have one
bachelor's degree if I transfer the
credits does that mean I can do this
concurrently you know there were
technical questions and I assumed I
would go there and I would just take
Chinese courses and have a part-time job
and when I got there was like no that's
not possible you have to be a full-time
student with a really intense it was way
more intense than normal undergraduate
study load you have to do a study load
where you're doing all 400 level courses
all the time your whole and it's it is
just too much work the workload you need
a mix of 400 level in one of the level
courses just nerves the amount of
reading and writing involved and you
know I did handle it because I was up
but was 36 years old or something I was
very disciplined and I had no
distractions I remember I got a big
laugh out of one of my professors I said
look I can cope with this I don't even
have a girlfriend some students have one
girlfriend some students have two
girlfriends but like you you've got to
set up the workload in a way that you
can manage it but you know when I was
explained to them the amount of time and
what-have-you but yeah
however the short answer is the
University of Victoria that decision
ultimately was maced up based on limited
information
informational website talking to this
one advisor who told me nothing but
falsehoods whether intentional or
unintentional I've still have no idea
and then directly talking with the
professor or the senior professor of
Chinese who who taught you any self yeah
that was all that was what I could do
you know yes it can still be a disaster
and in many ways that's right yeah
that's true yeah so that's that's what
I'm trying to avoid yeah and I think
I've mentioned you the example of one of
the universities that have program in
Thai this is a tha I the Thai language
and when I got the guy on the phone that
was an email we had email first and I
just asked simple questions like well
I've looked at the faculty list for the
department's who is teaching Thai he
refused to answer the question
I didn't just ask like maybe three I'm
sorry cuz you know then he said
something irrelevant back as I'm sorry
I'm asking you who is the professor who
teaches the Thai language classes and he
was so fuss Kotori innovations I said
look I've looked at because you know
with any list of faculty you know
Department like that doesn't have that
many it's not like they have 20 people
in the Department of Southeast Asian
Studies there are only so many it's very
clear okay this person does Indonesia
and this person doesn't Malaysia and
this is the one person who does Thailand
it was a cool and you know I was asking
probably said and I think I said to him
oh do you teach it yourself like you
know it's another professor or what and
his refusal was so strange to me I
interpret at the time as meeting they
don't really teach the Thai language at
all but I was wrong he's white teacher i
a later photo from another professor
when I when I when I reported this
oh he's embarrassed cuz it's his wife
and I assume his wife doesn't have a PhD
or wasn't fully qualified I assume that
was the that was just very often the
case in western universities being
married to someone qualifies you I was
offered a position with only a
bachelor's degree teaching at the
University where my wife was a professor
just because I was married to her so
there's a lot a lot of corruption in
that kind in Western definitely in in
Canada and in the United Kingdom and I
don't know I can't talk with the United
States so it definitely can to the
United Kingdom's part of our part of our
proud
Anglican tradition I guess of English
being academia so look so it's
completely hopeless
I mean First Nations is a really strange
situation because it's not cash-poor
there's a lot of money in the game
there's infinite research funding
there's infinite project sorry pardon me
project funding I was gonna say program
and then I suppose that's what I have
there's a preeminent program funding its
infinite project funding there's there's
so much money for anyone with a
legitimate project to stand up and get
it and there's a lot of government
support now to compensate for decades of
neglect what there is is a crucial lack
of of talent there's a crucial lack of
people to teach you or work with or
foster you or answer the answer the
phone call where's the email so you know
how do you get ahead you know for me you
know the the fundamental log jam is I
don't think I would have any legitimacy
and First Nations if I don't become
fluent in a First Nations language to me
that's that's very fundamental because
otherwise I'm just so I'm like going so
and there are no and there are people
who would say oh well I got my first
diplomas political science so why don't
you just get a degree in political
science about helping First Nations
design to me no it's not acceptable same
way if you want to be involved in
politics of China you've got to learn
the Chinese language if you want to be
involved the politics of the curry or
the edge of way you got to learn a
language like Korea or jib what you know
your choice or if you'll want to do
mohawk or Inuit your choice I mean
that's a very serious barrier and entry
but the situation program by program
Department up by Department can totally
change in five years the Department I
was just at at University Victoria is
currently in receivership which means
the professor's within the Department
refused to get along so much they can't
appoint who's in charge they tried to
appoint someone external in charge and
that failed so like the department is
falling apart where the season is a
disaster right and you may you may not
know it as a student that does impact
you
the department is a disaster this is
this is not secret information so I can
say this on the Internet's that the
department has fallen apart this way the
last time I asked that was right into
the department I said oh so who's the
current chair who's the core head of the
department and I got a message back
explaining well hmm there is no chair
currently you know one professor can
totally define a dominant department
especially in a specific language or
specific discipline whether that's curry
or a jib way or Thai or Chinese or
anything else most of these fields
unless you're talking about a huge
department unless you happen to be at a
university of where you know the
Department of Biology is 300 professors
or something but most of times come into
it to a small number of people and you
know to make that decision today all of
it is on the students shoulders you got
to go there right the emails make the
phone calls you have to somehow get in
touch the professors ask the right
questions and then be willing to hear it
when they when they give you those
answers as of this moment yeah okay so
this is the other point you know
professors who I knew well I have
sometimes asked them do you know one
good option under this heading so the
First Nations is a really powerful
example of that because there is a very
small university and for it's right by
the border between United States and
Canada so I forget I think it's in
Minnesota but it's in one of those it's
in one of those Great Lakes states so
there was this small University of small
college that's strongly tied to local
First Nations people basically a jib way
and some other people there and I
discovered that this university exists
just because of a they have a
publication that the magazine and at
that time I was going through everything
that had ever been published in or about
Cree in a cheap way
and no different places in States than
the American side of the border so I
found this small college and I remember
I emailed some people I had like a jib
weigh discussion group I emailed about
it I said oh you know um is this a g-way
publication from this small town from
this small small college and I got
emails back you know I mean everyone's a
snob it's okay but I got emails back
saying like how could you not know about
this college they're like one of the
most important places for for the edge
of oil language and so on
and I wrote back and I said look I'm
gonna tell you something I talked face
to face and by email by phone with every
single major professor in this field and
I asked them do you know one good option
for studying a Ghibli and none of them
mentioned this college none of them I
brainstorm with you class so if you are
telling me this is a great college or a
good college or even an adequate college
to study a jib way--at I have a really
serious counterfactual claim here I have
reasons to be to be skeptical because
when I asked the professors who are in
that field who are lifetime specialists
not one of them said oh yeah I know a
good place for you to go in and learn a
jib way right now you could say that
about Korean in other situations but in
Asian Studies that cuts even deeper
because theoretically there are so many
institutions in Asian Studies and when I
was asking professors well do you know
even one good place and some of the
conversation is do you know one good
place for an ma PhD within Canada but
sometimes it was global or centers
specifically like looked you know one to
place in Japan but I mean these were
really broad questions and where I'm
face-to-face the president presser sits
there for a while and thinks about it
and there is either no answer or they
say something after thinking about it
for a while like did you ever apply to
join the CIA seriously 1 1 1 professor I
remember he said have you considered
going to business school getting degree
you know business management degree you
know you've got to take the significance
of that you know what I mean don't it's
so easy for people to you or
themselves he's like oh I'm
sure there were lots of great options
I'm not sure and there are not lots of
great option and I'm someone who's now
been doing this kind of low-level
research for like 15 years continuously
I don't want to count the number of
years of talking to professor's in these
in these different fields and yeah
sometimes you get a really clear answer
like the door is closed against you or
the doors open and they say you're
welcome come on in but a lot of the time
what you get are mixed signals it's like
well you can get an MA here
you can get a PhD here but and that's
where you really need to try to get
other sources of of intelligence you
know it's tough and today I think a
hundred percent of the burden is on the
students I think the professor's I was
asking that way I don't think they're
used to being asked that question they
don't see that as part of their role of
fire they don't see their role as
finding and creating opportunities for
for students so and it is normally if
you read their job description
especially the professor that has
graduate advisor and they're in there in
their job title it really is so yeah
we'll see I mean we're looking now at
such a crazy variety of options
including going to a practical college
and getting degrees as Baker's learning
to attorney had a baked bread learning
at a bake a cake and the thing is for me
that still doesn't preclude the
possibility getting a PhD because for me
if in the next 10 years I can work as a
baker to work as a caterer can work in a
kitchen and I can easily get a PhD in my
spare time but I need an institution to
help me doing anything that's a wrap